welcome to topcast and in this episode
i'm returning to stephen pinker's book
rationality eventually this is going to
be a long introduction exploring the
topics in the title of today's chapter i
said in the last episode on this book
and this will be underlined today that
this is an excellent book if you've ever
wanted to go to university but couldn't
afford it or didn't have time or it was
too far away or maybe you just weren't
interested in the lofty world of
academia when you were younger or maybe
you did go to university but never took
a course that at any point mentioned
something like critical thinking it's
curious that many university courses
these days do mention critical thinking
because it's part of that duo of
educational buzzwords critical and
creative thinking universities market
themselves in part as teaching people
how to think better both critically and
creatively so even if a student doesn't
take a course titled critical and
creative thinking at least some of their
courses will say that these are the
skills they will develop over the course
of the semester somehow even schools
these days tout their credentials as
hubs of innovation creativity and
critical thinking it wasn't always this
way schools and universities were rather
more often narrowly focused on
particular disciplines and they aimed to
be vocational somewhat but gradually
over the last couple of decades at least
they have claimed to be places where
students learn what they call
transferable skills
of course things like reading and
writing and numeracy have always been
that they're not intended to be useful
in just one subject area but rather can
be transferred so that the content of
any subject discipline can be more
readily learned elementary or primary
schools used to claim a monopoly of
sorts with much of what they were
teaching they could always fall back on
and saying well this stuff you know the
basics the fundamentals of reading and
writing and arithmetic is actually
useful no matter who you are or what you
will end up doing so you need to learn
the content that is taught in an
elementary school so you might as well
attend one it's universally useful high
schools on the other hand have often had
a more difficult case to make there's
rather too many adults who come out and
say they've never needed either
trigonometry or algebra or shakespeare
for the rest of their lives indeed
they'll claim that english class ruined
good books and their science teachers
turned them off science so what was the
point this idea that some or even much
of what is taught in high school never
gets used by a typical person leads to
these debates that just go on and on
without end about the content of a
school curriculum a study gets released
that says kids today are more overweight
than ever so governments show they are
addressing that issue by increasing the
amount of physical education students
must take and so they can learn about
the evils of soft drink and nutrition
class if an international ranking puts
your nation well below the top of the
league's tables in science well a
government might make an additional year
of it compulsory for all students on the
left calls can be made for the rewriting
of the history curriculum to highlight
the evils of colonialism invasion and
the resulting extant racism and on the
right for teaching the virtues of
democracy and the horrors of
totalitarianism often through a canon of
classics so governments decide it's only
reasonable that students are taught all
of these perspectives and so learn to
think critically about them
lucky those students
this all perspectives approach comes
into religious instruction as well why
shouldn't they learn about every
religion so it's argued and even in
science teach them the controversy view
teach them the big bang but also many of
the prominent creation stories and if
that's okay then yeah sure teach them
climate change in fact teach them
climate change every single year where
possible through the lens of each and
every single subject they take but now
also teach them what the skeptics say
and then on top of that teach them the
response to the skeptics and if by the
end you haven't filled up the curriculum
entirely never mind because we still
have to recognize the strong case being
made that the fundamentals from
schooling as it was 30 years ago are
also a crucial basis for everything else
so we need to keep all of that content
as well all of this has the effect of
never actually reducing the quantity of
content that a typical student is
expected to learn the quantity of
content only ever increases i mention
this because two things happen
simultaneously in schools one causing
the other there is an expectation that
certain highly specialized issues are
covered in schools for example like the
soft drinks things soft drinks are evil
or how fossil fuels are destroying the
planet indeed anyone who has ever opined
in public about what is taught in
schools almost always has their special
area of expertise that it is crucial for
students to understand bankers and
economists will say that finance needs
to be learned and they even call it
financial literacy police say stranger
danger online safety and driving skills
are needed lawyers say rights and what
to do if arrested need to be known and
for some reason now everyone encounters
robotics very early on and all of this
tends to leave modern education open to
the charge of becoming far too niche
so what is done in response is an
attempt to craft content that is
deliberately broad and claimed to be
useful in any subject
enter critical and creative thinking
hence children in many schools now will
learn things that sound as if they
belong on an application for a job in
the corporate world like personal and
social skills or intercultural
understanding
among these so-called broad-based skills
in australia we call them general
capabilities you also get critical and
creative thinking skills there is a
remarkably unified global educational
culture by the way countries can differ
markedly in any other respect but in
terms of education systems even if the
language of instruction is completely
different and there is very little
common history what is being taught in
school is becoming uniform across the
planet australia france argentina south
korea when one educational jurisdiction
makes some change the others take notice
and often follow the fad if it seems
like the new wave to catch no one wants
to be left behind no one ever wants to
be left behind the fear of being left
behind motivates almost everything in
education and breeds this constant
content creep that happens in a
connected world of educators so if you
went to school even five years ago much
less 15 or 50
then the idea you would encounter
content specifically about how to think
critically and creatively it might all
sound rather foreign but it is becoming
the norm now along with all those other
things i mentioned and the reason for
this is because education is trend
driven content comes into vogue but
unlike with cod pieces and capes very
little goes out of fashion entirely at
best it's like the periodicity of mini
skirt popularity some things seem to be
a quaint curiosity of the past only to
reappear once more as if being a true
innovation so in education almost all of
the content taught 50 years ago just
continues to exist alongside the new
trendier stuff so a school will still
teach the periodic table and kids today
will learn by rote rather often the
first 10 20 or 30 or more elements some
will say it's not compulsory to do these
days but many teachers will still
encourage and reward a practice like
that but they will also learn by heart
the various names of indigenous tribes
around the world and what their
predominant creation myths are so
because of this trend where the content
gets increasingly more specialized in
one direction
it leaves that open as a criticism
becoming too specialized which is why
the general skills are introduced into
the curriculum which supposedly underpin
thinking across every subject in the
case of critical thinking which is part
of the topic of today's episode it's
been there in the university somewhat
longer and is likely the reason why it
eventually caught on in schools in
recent years now personally i noticed
this or you might be thinking i seem to
have a b in my bonnet about this for a
few reasons the first is because well i
was always interested in that the very
topic critical thinking i always liked
being able to sift the sense from the
nonsense and being able to point to what
criteria was useful in doing exactly
that why was astrology not really making
predictions were those flashing lights
in the sky evidence of alien life how
can we separate the pseudoscience from
the science and so on i liked looking
for the deeper reasons what united the
nonsense rather than having to deal with
things more piecemeal and on a
case-by-case basis it seemed it could be
very useful in other words efficient to
learn the deepest criteria for being
able to quickly adjudicate whether the
subject in question was getting us
closer to the truth or whether it was
just pretending to hint and this is
something i'll return to in this episode
what we're actually looking for is
whether and to what extent some
discipline is focused on detecting and
correcting errors that is how knowledge
growth happens that's how knowledge
quality improves and progress is made if
a subject is just about pushing
particular narratives about the future
or particular theories that resemble
click bait where none of it really is
ever arrived at with a methodology
anyone explains well then some deception
is going on
actual methods of knowledge creation
involve that error detection i keep on
going on about and that takes checking
claims against what we know and what we
know about how we know and when it comes
to scientific matters at times against
reality itself absent any of this errors
won't be found in the first place let
alone stand any chance of being
corrected so
interested in such criteria for sense
versus nonsense when i was at university
i looked for subjects that mentioned
terms like critical thinking in their
promotional material and i can tell you
that 20 years ago or so it was indeed
rather rare another reason is that later
when i found myself involved in teaching
i noticed that what i thought i'd
eventually learned myself was useful
when it came to critical thinking never
appeared in the standard curriculum and
then as critical and creative thinking
gradually became a part of standard
educational jargon that teachers began
using it was to label a bunch of things
i thought of as anything but critical
and creative thinking indeed it might
simply be that actual critical and
creative thinking was just not able to
be properly learned within the
traditional school system precisely
because
the traditional school system is not
intended to be a place where students
object to or improve upon the curriculum
itself so personally i have a little bit
of history with this now of course
there's also this bizarre thing that
really is just an issue recently in the
united states as far as i can tell which
is confusingly called critical theory or
critical race theory i'm basically
passing over that in silence because
well there's nothing critical about it
it shares the word critical but nothing
else it seems to be anti-critical in the
sense that it's a bunch of dogmas
purporting to be absolute truths
intended for use as indoctrination in
schools which of course rather much of
schooling does turn out to be but this
critical race theory stuff is a return
to something like victorian era
religious instruction or perhaps
something more like what occurs in
socialist and communist regimes it's not
critical in the broader sense of the
word and really has nothing to do with
critical thinking so we can just mention
it only to now ignore it instead what
this chapter before us is called is
logic and critical thinking from
pinker's book and it does provide an
overview of what those terms are all
about from a university lecturer's
perspective recall as i said in the last
episode about this that the entire book
rationality arose out of stephen
pinker's teaching of a course by the
same name at harvard university in 2020
a quick google search will get you to
videos of the lectures professor pinker
delivered on all of this stuff so it's
freely available which means you can
learn all of that as well or even better
than if you actually attended the
university itself for one thing
attending the university itself means
learning the content under constraints
that won't apply if you're learning it
whenever and wherever you want i'm
belaboring all this just to say that
again the book is an excellent overview
of exactly what universities regard
these topics as being about and what the
fundamentals of them entail and that
could be very useful to many people and
i should say that what harvard
apparently has offered in 2020 i
recognize at least some of exactly the
same kinds of things that i learned 20
years ago at universities in australia
so this kind of thing about logic and
critical thinking is pretty consistent
across
countries and across space and across
time so at the risk of further
self-indulgence some more of a personal
diversion for this episode first when i
first entered university i enrolled in a
physics and astronomy course being brand
new to university and actually knowing
no one among my friends or family who'd
been to university that includes
extended family i knew little about it
and so basically treated it like school
so the university enrolled me in
particular subjects and i never knew
that one had the option of doing
anything else so in the first semester i
was enrolled in this subject called
computer applications of experimental
science the title of which gave very
little clue about the content which if
i'd known the content prior to being
enrolled into it i probably wouldn't
have remained in the course but as it
was i kind of accidentally fell into
this course because in my mind it was
compulsory long story short though it
was about logic and learning to program
in machine code machine code is one step
up from programming in binary the
language of a computer itself the
machine code normally sits between the
binary that the computer understands and
whatever the higher level programming
language is that the programmer normally
uses to instruct the computer
so that was part of this course the
logic part of the course was about logic
gates the way hardware did what it did
at the level of electronic circuitry in
a computer so for example a logic gate
could be an and gate in an and gate two
inputs come in and one input goes out
the only way the and gate outputs a one
or an on signal call it what you want is
if both of the inputs receive a one or
an on signal if only one of them does at
a time or neither of them then the and
gate is turned off another gate is the
or gate so here we require at least one
of the inputs to be on and then the
output will be on also hence or is one
or the other input on yes okay send a
binary one signal a curious thing about
all of this is that any logical gate
there are more logic gates than what
i've just mentioned
can be represented by some combination
of what are called nand gates or not and
gates the nand gate is universal so i'd
taken a subject in high school that was
basically computer science and they
touched on some of this but now it
became clearer to me that this logic
thing went way deeper than i thought
initially and i saw i began reading
about it more widely and of course this
was happening at the same time i was
realizing that the reason i was
interested in astronomy in the first
place was because i was interested in
fundamental things like what are the
biggest structures in the universe what
are the deepest laws that apply to the
evolution of the universe as a whole and
of course how we can possibly know all
of this and what the limits are to what
we know so of course this leads to
mathematics and philosophy both which
have a common shared basis as i began to
understand in logic so i decided to
learn more about that logic formally and
went searching for where i could learn
more about it at university it seemed it
was available for study both
interestingly enough in philosophy
courses where there were explicit
subjects and higher years about logic
and also some mathematics courses but
again only in the higher years so i
looked into what i needed to take first
to satisfy the prerequisites always one
of the most frustrating parts of taking
any course at university satisfying the
prerequisites and all of this led me
into discovering that my science degree
allowed me to swap out some of these
subjects that had rolled me into
automatically for others anyways i ended
up enrolling in my first formal
philosophy subject in my second semester
and that was called reasoning values and
persons it was the reasoning bit that
grabbed me and that was the first
subject i took with an emphasis on what
analytical philosophy regarded reasoning
to be that allowed me to take a subject
just called logic a semester later and i
found that to be little different from
my kind of algebra and if you're into
that sort of thing it can be kind of fun
because it's basically a game or a
puzzle you learn the rules literally
they're called rules of inference and
you are given a set of premises and told
to show how the conclusion follows and
this subject went through three simple
kinds of logic beginning with what is
known as propositional logic or
sentential logic it's baby logic the
foundation and the easiest and if you
want an insight into what logic is the
most important in rationality in this
chapter stephen pinker gives an overview
of propositional logic the next kind is
called predicate logic which can be
defined in lots of different ways but my
preferred description of it is that it
is basically propositional logic with
the ability to use operators for all and
there exist and these are known as
quantifiers and my university went on to
the next most complicated sort which is
called relational predicate logic which
introduces more variables still now
completing that basic subject of logic
allowed me in my second year to take on
something called philosophical logic and
that went into how to prove the
soundness and completeness of logical
systems among other things the soundness
of a system is about how something like
the system of propositional logic only
proved true conclusions from true
premises and completeness was that all
theorems in the system could actually be
proved and finally by third year i was
able to take a subject offered by the
mathematics department called logic and
computation which went into proofs for
incompleteness of arithmetic alongside
things like programming turing machines
now what has all of that to do with
anything well the message i took away
from it all was that personally i found
all of that interesting because it
aligned with what i'd been reading about
in the fabric of reality for example
when it came to girdle and the
limitations on what can be known and
what seemed to crop up in lots of
popular science i'd been reading but and
this is a very big but i never felt that
any of it did anything whatsoever to
improve or even change my day-to-day
thinking i never thought that being able
to competently use rules of inference to
prove a conclusion followed from
premises made me a better critical
thinker it was all of it essentially
algebra no one ever actually took
symbolic formal logic and then applied
it to an actual argument in the real
world that i could see to show if and
how it was invalid they never needed to
invalid arguments were shown to be
invalid arguments by valid arguments in
english in natural language so courses
on logic to me were like courses i took
in physics it wasn't like either gifted
one with a special ability to pick up a
newspaper or turn on a documentary and
begin noticing more errors than
otherwise unless the article or show was
specifically about logic or physics in
other words the skill didn't really seem
transferable in the way that it's
marketed today but still the marketing
material would say for any course on
logic that it would teach you to think
logically and of course that's a logical
claim right learn logic learn how to be
logical but here's a thing to be noticed
about university students especially if
you elect to enroll in a class like
formal logic you're going to find your
fellow classmates are already like you
in that crucial way the kind of person
who thinks learning logic will be useful
somehow they're already focused on
thinking in a particular way they come
into class with a sort of skeptical
analytical disposition which my guesses
remains 95 unaffected by their formal
learning and logic after all what is it
that universities and these days schools
think formal training and logic and
critical thinking will accomplish what
they think is that it will provide what
is necessary for someone to then figure
out on their own by using logic and
critical thinking what is true in
science or history or the media or
anywhere else they will spot the errors
made in those theories being presented
and so arrive at the truth rather than
being misled seems reasonable right
wrong
well the thing is that explanations in
any domain do not represent the abstract
logical proofs that logicians are
competent in creating they simply aren't
deductions from premises or if they are
logic cannot possibly show you what
might be wrong with the premises logic
is utterly silent on the truth of the
premises or the conclusions or anything
else so really formal logic is an
exceedingly narrow tool when used to
find errors in an explanation at best it
can serve to show that a particular step
might be invalid but even then in almost
all cases no formal logic is ever
consulted people can already see what
the problem is if someone says the
supposed trend of global warming cannot
possibly be real because this week has
been unseasonably cold we just explained
that trends in nature are rarely
perfectly linear expertise in logic or
abstract thinking more broadly is not
only no guarantee of infallibility i
doubt it helps much at all as a skill
that really is transferable as they call
it
namely if you are an expert in logic
then this knowledge cannot necessarily
be transferred to your analysis of
ethics or history or science logic
rarely settles disputes in the real
world people argue about the truth of
particular assumptions or about the
supposed consequences of some particular
policy neither of which is a matter of
logic i mean consider the unabomber he
turned out to be ted kaczynski famously
an adept mathematician apparently he
understood quite a bit about the formal
process of reaching valid conclusions or
consider fields medal winner edward
whitton's twitter feed if that's
anything to go by then again logic and
mathematics alone won't prevent an
unhealthy obsession with israel
and even albert einstein made the case
for a one world government something i'd
guess would be a fast track to global
immigration all of which is to say there
is not a class of people especially
immune to error it's not a class of
people especially logical who form some
sort of class of elite thinkers who are
going to agree with all the other elite
thinkers out there something else is
going on in human minds well beyond
logic and a desire for consistency
people are not calculating conclusions
but generating guesses they're not doing
anything like what other computers
hitherto are doing trying to perform a
task that it has been programmed to
people instead are making up tasks as
they go along in order to solve some
problem they've just encountered there
is no escaping computational
universality the brain is a computer but
it is quite a leap from that basic fact
of physics to
the mind running on that computer is a
single fixed program that can ultimately
be reduced to a particular pattern of
logic gates it's interesting that if it
were that shouldn't we be better at
logic the mind is more like that thing
which can have problems one moment it
has this problem it's working on and the
next it's something else and each
problem it has it attempts to find the
best solution in that problem situation
whether that solution is strictly
contradicted by something from another
solution that relies upon elsewhere
might not be noticed or if it's noticed
partitioned away to either be
contemplated later or completely
forgotten a mind deals with
contradictions in a way that would cause
any other program running on any other
computer to grind to a halt and deliver
an error message effectively the mind
creates new explanations without regard
about how they fit together for the
moment or if they contradict almost
everyone knows the feeling i want to be
as healthy as possible i answer yes to
the question do i want to be as healthy
as possible but simultaneously i
answered yes to do i want to sit down
with another cookie or packet of chips
yes i want to do what it takes to be as
healthy as possible and yes i want to do
the opposite a person makes sense of
this and keeps on making progress
solving problems switching from one
objective or interest to another having
motivation to do one thing and then
another we've never programmed a
computer to be motivated to do anything
at all we don't know how so existing
computer programs just do things that we
program them to they don't have problems
we have problems a computer treats a
contradiction in its code as a reason
for halting
we see it as a problem but we don't come
to a complete stop as we've talked about
many times here before even our deepest
theories of physics logically contradict
one another and although it's an
important problem it's not a deep
emergency it doesn't cause us to stop
everything else until we've solved that
problem quantum theory is still used to
solve problems and make progress and so
is general relativity even if they make
logically incompatible claims about the
deepest nature of reality logical
consistency is not required for
rationality and progress it is entirely
rational to use those theories even if
their conjunction is a contradiction
strictly illogical one might say oh but
they don't contradict because one makes
claims only about this domain and the
other makes claims about some other
different domain no that's quite wrong
they're both universal they both claim
to be universal and that's the point
they don't limit their own domains of
applicability so it's absolutely a
problem that these incompatible claims
are made and physicists work towards
trying to resolve that contradiction
towards trying to unite general
relativity and quantum theory in some
way but the fact they are logically
incompatible in a deep way does not
prevent progress from being made either
in quantum theory or relativity as i
said their unification is just one path
to progress for one particular problem
so if progress and problem solving can
happen and does happen in spite of
logical contradictions
why is logic held in such a lofty place
academically anyway well because it
works a claim that something is
illogical is indeed a criticism it
labels a problem we should want to
resolve like in the case of assuming
that in one mood the deeper structures
of the universe vary continuously and
then in others that they vary discreetly
that's a problem but it's not a barrier
to progress and that progress will come
if we simply take it as a working
assumption that say
reality is fundamentally discrete and
then see what solutions that leads to
using logic or in other situations where
we have failed to resolve the issue it's
not because logic itself is a barrier or
faulty but because we haven't been
imaginative enough yet to find a
creative solution putting aside that
logic works as a method of criticism to
illuminate where the problems are and
thus where progress might be made we
have a tradition in philosophy
stretching all the way back to aristotle
who formalized early versions of it
aristotle's logic was focused on
syllogisms these syllogisms were all
about the terms all and some and none or
equivalently every and there exists
which are if you recall the basic
operators in predicate logic but
syllogisms consist of three lines
normally and in the aristotelian version
there is a major premise a minor premise
and a conclusion which involve
existential claims and again that means
all or none or some those words the
first of the valid forms that's normally
talked about in the aristotelian scheme
is the form called aaa triple a which
goes all men are mortal all greeks are
men therefore all greeks are mortal you
might have heard a version of this
before it usually crops up i think
pinker might even point it out at some
point too in his book which is the
kind of version of that syllogism which
goes all men are mortal socrates as a
man therefore socrates is mortal but
that is actually not a syllogism in the
traditional aristotelian sense because
of that second line
the line that says socrates is a man is
not of the form it's not of an
existential form in other words it
should be written as there exists some
man whatever the case aristotle made a
big deal about logic so
like so much of what the ancient
athenians and greeks did it exists there
in philosophy today still another reason
is that mathematics is viewed as a
pristine discipline in academia whose
techniques and conclusions reach a level
of certainty not possible elsewhere and
logic is seen as the most fundamental
branch of mathematics underpinning
everything else now this idea that logic
underpins mathematics is true and the
two things formal symbolic logic and
mathematics aren't different formal
symbolic logic is a branch of
mathematics but the idea is the deepest
area of mathematics it's not exactly
correct it was once thought this had to
be the case that no matter what area of
mathematics ultimately it could be
broken down to its basic logical
constituents
if this could be done for trigonometry
and geometry and algebra and calculus
and number theory then it was thought
that there could be a list of axioms
underpinning all of mathematics from
which every theorem ever needed in
mathematics could be logically derived
presumably by a computer programmed with
those axioms and the rule of inference
this is known formally in mathematics as
hilbert's program after the
mathematician david hilbert who early
last century proposed work be done to
find that ultimate foundation of
mathematics but it was kurt gerdel who
showed that hilbert's program could
never actually be achieved there cannot
be a single set of axioms forming the
basis of all of mathematics from which
everything that is true or valid in some
system would have a proof instead girdle
showed that forget anything more
complicated like all of mathematics just
the few axioms underpinning simple
arithmetic are such that even in simple
arithmetic there can be valid claims
made for which no one would ever be able
to prove one way or the other whether
it's true or false this is known as
incompleteness this is to be contrasted
with more simple systems like
propositional logic which is a simpler
system than simple arithmetic and
practical logic propositional logic and
predicate logic you can write down a
string of symbols which if it is a valid
string of symbols there will be a proof
four against it given the axioms within
that system in other words proposition
and predicate logic are complete so
without going into those details any
further we see that logic is looked to
in some way not merely as a tool of
rationality
but something like the ultimate arbiter
or at times it has been at least i think
many more people today understand that
formal logic is sometimes useful as a
tool and that being illogical is
actually always a problem but the fact
we can live with contradictions does not
mean there is a problem with logic it
just means that problems are possible
and exist and we haven't yet been able
to resolve them and there will always be
problems so we should expect to find
contradictions and eventually because
problems are soluble to also resolve
those contradictions but in doing so to
find more problems okay so this is
possibly one of the longest
introductions i've ever done to an
episode of topcast but remember with
this book that i'm going through
rationality by pinker i'm not reading it
as extensively as i am with the other
books that i go through i'm just
basically giving an overview of what
happens to be in the chapter reading a
very small amount and then reflecting on
that small amount that i do read without
further ado let's get into some reading
today from rationality by pinker so
chapter three
logic and critical thinking by stephen
pinker and he writes quote in the
previous chapter we asked why humans
seem to be driven by what mr spock
called foolish emotions in this one
we'll look at the irritating illogic the
chapter is about logic not in the loose
sense of rationality itself but in the
technical sense of inferring true
statements conclusions from other true
statements premises
from the statements all women are mortal
and zanthippi is a woman for example we
can deduce xanthippi as mortal
and end quote just my note on that keep
in mind here that even this way of
presenting logic can be misleading a
valid logical proof will lead to
conclusions that are as true as the
premises were of course we cannot
establish that the premises are true in
the first place using logic or indeed
using any process available to us
fallible humans so it remains all
assumed the woven web of guesses as we
like to say around here as pinker goes
on to say in the very next paragraph
quote
deductive logic is a potent tool despite
the fact that it can only draw out
conclusions that are already contained
in the premises
unlike inductive logic the topic of
chapter 5 which guides us in
generalizing from evidence paused there
my reflection and fans will know exactly
what i'm going to say here inductive
logic is not the thing that allows you
to generalize from evidence despite what
everyone thinks
and this will be an important thing when
we get there but
it's par for the course outside the work
of papa and david deutsch you'll almost
never find a treatment of reasoning
that just assumes induction or inductive
reasoning is what it takes to prove the
truth or near truth or whatever you like
of your premises it's taken for granted
that there is such a process called
induction but there isn't what we have
instead are conjectures
guesses checked against reality and
which serve as the only known starting
points also there is confusion outside
most of the epistemology i've read
anyway outside of papa that in some
ultimate sense deduction really is
reason it's the gold standard it's the
idea that at root claims about the world
have to be arrived at deductively for
them to be reliable or else ultimately
they cannot be logical in some way hence
to say anything true you have to be
certain that your premises are true so
you have to be a dogmatist of a kind in
other words endorse the idea of
self-evident truth at least as starting
points the alternative is conjectural
explanations conjectural explanatory
knowledge that solves problems rather
than certain truth that allows you to
deduce certainly true conclusions so in
reading books like this one like
rationality here before it's by pinker
where it's clear the author doesn't
really grapple with or ignores or
misunderstands rejects or possibly just
doesn't see the importance in the
overall approach to knowledge that papa
gifts us with one has to keep in mind
what's going on psychologically there
what is the motivation in their writing
about knowledge or with logic and
rationality the whole motivation is to
find
a firm foundation because then and only
then can you begin to create knowledge
it's identical to descartes project he
began with i think i am as the necessary
truth and from there he was able to
infer everything else logically deduce
everything else logically and really
this is what even writers today
centuries later are still trying to do
if they have rejected ignored or
misunderstood papa and so that's really
what we've got here we've got the
a search a search for a firm foundation
and having found the firm foundation or
trying to get the firm foundation then
you go on to deduce everything else
let's keep going pinker writes since
people agree on many propositions all
women are mortal the square of 8 is 64.
rocks fall down and not up murder is
wrong
the goal of arriving at new less obvious
propositions is one we can all embrace
a tool with such power allows us to
discover new truths about the world from
the comfort of our armchairs and to
resolve disputes about the many things
people don't agree on
the philosopher gottfried william
leibniz
1646-1716 fantasized that logic could
bring about an epistemic utopia quote
from leibniz
the only way to rectify our reasonings
is to make them as tangible as those of
the mathematicians so that we can find
our error at a glance and when there are
disputes among persons we can simply say
let us calculate without further ado to
see who is right end quote back to
pinker you may have noticed that three
centuries later we are still not
resolving disputes by saying let us
calculate
this chapter will explain why end quote
and what i'll say about that is i don't
think it fully does because it's not
embracing the idea of conjectural
knowledge and applying rationality to
conjectural knowledge but instead it's a
foundationalist picture of how we arrive
at knowledge about reality it never
really figures out
why
you can't just calculate your way to
knowledge as leibniz hoped and so for
anyone who rejects the idea or doesn't
really understand the idea of knowledge
being conjectural if you don't take that
to heart then it will of course be a
great mystery that in terms of that
epistemology why logic doesn't resolve
all of our conflicts you will likely say
well logic is perfect but people are not
well what pinker goes on to say is
quote one reason is that logic can be
really hard even for logicians and it's
easy to misapply the rules leading to
formal fallacies another is that people
often don't even try to play by the
rules and commit informal fallacies
the goal of exposing these fallacies and
coaxing people into renouncing them is
called critical thinking end quote so
there in pinker what pink is saying
there is that it's people that are the
problem they don't apply logic perfectly
and they make mistakes now yes that's
perfectly fine that's true but it's not
the reason why we cannot resolve all
conflicts using logic even if everyone
were perfectly logical all the time or
near perfect it wouldn't help the issue
is not a lack of proficiency with logic
reasoning just cannot work that way
because there cannot be a single set of
axioms that can serve as a starting
point from which we can derive knowledge
after all we want to know what those
starting points are in the first place
and if they can be improved
and how moreover
those starting points those axioms that
serve as what we're using to derive our
conclusions ostensibly to create our
knowledge on this view
they will be incomplete because of
godel's incompleteness theorem that will
apply
and no go theorems like arrows no go
theorem will imply
that not all of our premises will be
able to be satisfied simultaneously even
if they're all reasonable and thus we
must always fall back into requiring
creativity new explanations and new
modes of explanation knowledge creation
simply is not
purely deductive and that is why logic
cannot be the be-all and end-all as
pinker goes on to say himself quote but
a major reason we don't just calculate
without further ado
is that logic like other normative modes
of rationality is a tool that is
suitable for seeking certain goals with
certain kinds of knowledge and it is
unhelpful with others end quote okay so
what pinker says there i find a little
confusing
this section began with a promise to
explain why logic cannot resolve all
disputes but here it's saying it's
unhelpful with certain kinds of
knowledge i find this misleading because
i think logic is as pinker calls it
there
a normative mode of rationality or
rather something that forms a part of
rationality it's a tool
and the tool can be helpful no matter
what but sometimes rather often
what we have is a case of not having
literally logically derived the
knowledge under discussion but we have
once again conjectured it and tested it
and found it solves the problem but as
to testing whether it has been derived
using logical rules of inference validly
well again by definition it often hasn't
when it's been conjectured now this is
the case no matter what the kind of
knowledge is i'd like to know what these
kinds of knowledge are that pinker has
in mind we don't really learn so
presumably there are places where logic
applies and there's places where logic
doesn't on this view now i reject that i
think that logic can always be applied
anywhere it's just sometimes it won't be
particularly informative which may be
what pinker is trying to say here but i
don't see the reason for dividing up
knowledge into different categories some
of which will obey the laws of logic and
some of which won't
i don't think that's useful i think
logic can apply across the board it's
just that sometimes it won't reveal
where the error is or reveal a path
towards progress and other times it will
okay so the next section is called
formal logic and formal fallacies and
i'm going to read sections of this and
leave other sections out but let's begin
pinker begins by saying quote logic is
called formal because it deals not with
the contents of statements but with
their forms the way they are assembled
out of subjects predicates and logical
words like and or not all some if and
then often we apply logic to statements
whose content we care about such as the
president of the united states shall be
removed from office on impeachment for
and conviction of treason bribery or
other high crimes and misdemeanors
we deduce that for a president to be
removed he must not only be impeached
but also convicted and that he need not
be convicted of both treason and bribery
one is enough but the laws of logic are
general purpose they apply
whether the content is topical obscure
or even nonsensical it was this point to
not mere whimsy that led lewis carroll
to create the syllagisms in his 1896
symbolic logic textbook many of which
are still used in logic courses today
for example from the premises a lame
puppy would not say thank you if you
offered to lend it a skipping rope and
you offered to lend the lame puppy a
skipping rope one may deduce the puppy
did not say thank you
end quote and on that point there yes
that's quite right these syllogisms
illustrate that all we need to know here
is that logic or deduction alone
can't create knowledge because where did
the axioms come from they didn't come
from a logical deduction by definition
and just a side point here and this
might seem unfair but in the passage i
just read just notice what comes to mind
first for the author
when an example of something we
supposedly all care about he said here's
something we all care about and that
something was
political it's politics it was something
about the u.s president now it might not
seem a big thing except in the context
of this whole book supposedly about
rationality which is a term of
epistemology is independent of the
content that it's being applied to but
university academics especially are
absolutely fixated on politics it would
seem they talk politics in classes even
when the class should be about something
else and in this case about anything
else because you can apply this
rationality thing to anything else but
the example that's often employed is an
example from politics now that
particular case here about conditions
under which the united states president
will be impeached or not is entirely
innocuous except as we will come to see
the other examples that crop up
throughout the book which are very
parochial and very timely there they're
about 2016 through to 2020 they're about
trump and clinton and various people
that have cropped up over the last half
decade or so so he's very fixated on
trying to talk about
the recent history of politics and in
the united states
which for someone who's interested in
logic and rationality is rather
distracting because there's so much
other fodder out there which could be
used from deeper history or indeed
science and other subjects but if you're
sort of obsessed in some way with us
politics then that's what's front of
mind and in particular it is the thing
that as pinker says here let me just
read the sentence again often we apply
logic to statements whose content we
care about such as blah blah blah the
u.s president
[Laughter]
for many of us we don't care or at least
we care much less than what we care
about you know certain other things that
are more interesting in the world like
the truths of physics and chemistry and
geology and astronomy and
so on and so forth but anyway let's
persevere pinker goes on to say quote
systems of logic are formalized as rules
that allow one to deduce new statements
from old statements by replacing some
strings of symbols with others the most
elementary is called propositional
calculus calculus is latin for pebble
and the term reminds us that logic
consists of manipulating symbols
mechanically without pondering their
content simple sentences are reduced to
variables like p and q which are
assigned a truth value true or false
complex statements can be formed out of
simple ones with the logical connectors
and or not and if then end quote so
yes this is one of those cases where in
this subject of formal logic we have
some annoyingly ambiguous terminology
there's no standard way to talk about
those p's and q's of formal logic beyond
saying well they're variables usually
when on their own just as a p or a q in
logic we call it a proposition and hence
that's where you get this term
propositional logic from for the most
basic of all kinds of logic
when you put them together
for example you put p and q together
logically p and q as a statement
this is called a statement quite often
or sometimes even a sentence it's
confusing because
p and q being variables represent
something else or can stand in for
something else like it might represent
the claim socrates is a man so let p
equal that claim socrates is a man but
if it's the case that something like
p
is a statement and a particular
instantiation of it socrates as a man is
also a statement well then we've got
something confusing going on and we need
to have a way of distinguishing between
p and q
and the things they represent or the
things that could be substituted for
them in logic i prefer now i personally
prefer the convention where p or q are
called propositions and then any string
of them remains a proposition as well
propositions are things that have truth
values so if p and q have a truth value
then any string of p's and q's linked
together with the logical operators and
or not if then and so on
also are called propositions but what
they represent like socrates is a man is
not a proposition it's not like that it
cannot be a priori necessarily true or
false in any sense it must contain
ambiguity ambiguity of a kind that p
does not for one thing socrates is long
dead so the word in the word is in
socrates is a man is rather misleading
was might get us closer to the truth
socrates was a man but anyone not living
in the proverbial cave in the last few
years would know that assuming one's
gender or sex is itself a contestable
area so saying socrates was a man is not
exactly a necessary truth but even if
you reject that even if you reject this
new age of gender ambiguity then you
might still think that to be a man is
something that isn't ideal that even
grown adult males don't always reach the
standard of maybe some think socrates
wasn't in fact a man by some standard
because he capitulated too easily to the
authorities and preferred death to life
whatever the case socrates is a man that
claim about the world is not like p
which is not a claim about anything and
so therefore that leads in
the world view of david deutch for
example to say in a particular tweet in
2018 quote from david only propositions
have truth values but we can't utter a
proposition we can only utter statements
which are at best approximations to
propositions end quote and this is an
important idea to take on board no
matter what words we use for this stuff
the fact is logic deals with p's and q's
variables that have truth values a
priori by definition of necessity
however you want to say this but what
they represent is not like this what
they represent are claims we can only
fallibly know and so are at best
approximately true
let's continue pinker goes on to say
quote you don't even have to know what
the connector words mean in english
their meaning consists only of rules
that tell you whether a complex
statement is true depending upon whether
the simple statements inside it are true
those rules are stipulated in truth
tables end quote okay so i'm not going
to read
pinker's explanation of this i'll just
go through it and we'll have a look at
these truth tables and how they work
this is something that anyone who's ever
encountered logic before can probably
skip over because it might be a bit
tedious so there are these logical
operators such as and for example so
here's the truth table for and we've got
a column for p and a column for q so
there's four different combinations of
truth values that p and q could take so
p could be true q could be true or p
could be true q could be false p could
be false q could be true and p could be
false and q could be false and then if
you have the conjunction of those the
logical conjunction which is where
you've got p and q well p and q are true
just in the case where p is true
and separately q is true so the
combination of them together is true but
if you're asking are is p true and is q
true in the second row well no it's not
so there's no other situation in this
truth table where both p and q are true
so that seems trivial and in fact they
do seem to be trivial until you get to
if p then q so we can see here the truth
table for p or q go through the same
thing and this is called the inclusive
or so in the case where you've got
either p is true
or q is true the situation where you've
got both of them being true at the same
time that's true if it's one or the
other that's also true it's only in the
case where p
both p and q are false that p or q is
false now is there is such a logical
operator as the exclusive or often
written as um x or and in the case of
xor
it's exactly the same as the truth table
for p or q but p x or q rules out
regards as false the situation where
both p
and q are true so there's a difference
between exclusive or and inclusive or
you know you get invited to a function
and they say uh during the dinner you
can have the chicken or the fish the all
there is exclusive or they don't expect
you to say both it doesn't imply that
you can have both on the other hand they
may say to you if you go to a fun park
you need to be over 18 to go on the
ferris wheel or above the height of 1.6
meters now if you are both over 18
and above 1.6 meters tall then that's
okay that's an inclusive or you can
satisfy both of those criteria so there
is a difference in english language
between the use of the inclusive and the
exclusive or as there is in logic so i'm
skipping a number of pages
and i'm going to the part where we're
going to
explain why it is that the if then logic
table has the form that it does
and i'm going to use
pinker's explanation of this because i
think it's quite good and an explanation
is needed because people who encounter
the if then table for the first time
wonder why it has
the structure that it does so i'm going
to pick it up where pinker is using a
fictional dialogue between a flirting
boy and girl so a couple here
are engaged in a little bit of banter
and the banter goes like this oliver
says what makes you so smart and jenny
says i wouldn't go for coffee with you
oliver says i wouldn't ask you and jenny
says that's what makes you stupid
and pinker goes on to say let's fill out
jenny's answer as
if you asked me to have coffee i would
say no
based on what we have been told is the
statement true
it is a conditional a statement formed
with an if the antecedent and then the
consequent
what is its truth table recall from the
wasson selection test in chapter one
that the only way for if p then q to be
false
is if
p is true while q is false
here's the table so we've got our p's
we've got our q's and we've got if p
then q so the first line is if p is true
and q is true then if p then q is true
the second line is the only one that's
false
if p is true but q is false then
the conditional becomes false but the
final two rows are the ones that often
cause people to pause because in this
situation we have the case where p the
antecedent is false
and regardless of what the value of q is
the conditional if p then q is always
true and what pinker says about this
is quote
if we take the students at their word
oliver would not ask her in other words
p is false
which in turn means that jenny's if then
statement is true lines three and four
in the third column the truth table
implies that her actual rsvp is
irrelevant as long as oliver never asks
she's telling the truth
now as the flirtatious scene closer
suggests oliver eventually does ask her
p switches from false to true and she
does accept q is false this means that
her conditional if p then q was false as
playful banter often is the logical
surprise we have just encountered that
as long as the antecedent of a
conditional is false the entire
conditional is true as long as oliver
never asks she is telling the truth
exposes a way in which a conditional in
logic differs from a statement with an
if and a then in ordinary conversation
generally we use a conditional to refer
to a warranted prediction based on a
testable causal law like if you drink
coffee you will stay awake we aren't
satisfied to judge the conditional is
true just because it was never tested
like if you drink turnip juice you will
stay awake which would be logically true
if you never drank turnip juice we want
there to be grounds for believing that
in the counterfactual situations in
which p is true you do drink turnip
juice not q you fall asleep would not
happen when the antecedent of a
conditional is known to be false or
necessarily false we're tempted to say
that the conditional was moot or
irrelevant or speculative or even
meaningless not that it is true okay so
i'm i'm skipping over a bit but pinker
again goes into uh using another
political example this time about
vice presidential candidate sarah palin
from
2008. so
yes another political example i'm going
to pick it up where
pinker just says quote the difference
between if in everyday english and if in
logic is just one example of how the
mnemonic symbols we use for connectors
in formal logic are not synonymous with
the ways they are used in conversation
where like all words they have multiple
meanings that are disambiguated in
context end quote so yes this is the
difference between formal logic which
can ignore the meanings of
everything just about and natural
language like english which is there to
communicate meanings personally i like
to read something like if p then q as if
you have a p
then you get a q or in other words in
cases where you don't have a p
the rule is still assumed to work it's
still assumed to be true hence why it is
that in those situations where p is
false where we have no p to begin with
it does not matter the rule happens the
rule still applies the rule is saying
that if you have a p
then you will get a q
which is what the first line is saying
explicitly in a case where you have a p
but then you don't get a q well it's a
situation where the rule has failed so
the rule itself must be false but those
last two rows they don't refute this
they are in a sense vacuously true so
that's the way i try to understand the
if p then q the if then table now truth
tables can actually get exceedingly
complicated
if you're interested in electronics for
example the programming of computers at
the most fundamental level at the level
of binary encoding of information then
logic gates combinations of logic gates
their outcomes can be represented by
truth tables but this is an extremely
cumbersome way of trying to get at
whether or not a particular argument is
valid or not or what the outcome of a
particular argument is going to be and
so
therefore there's a shorthand the
shorthand being so-called rules of
inference and rules of inference allow
one to
prove a conclusion follows given
premises these rules of inference they
kind of turn logic into a bit of a game
of algebra where you're putting together
the rules of inference in order to
figure out whether or not you can reach
the conclusion given the premises
as pinker goes on to say about logic
quote he says its power comes from rules
of valid inference little algorithms
that allow you to leap from true
premises to a true conclusion the most
famous is called affirming the
antecedent or modus ponens
the premises are written above the line
the conclusions below for example if p
then q
p
therefore q and pinker gives an example
if someone is a woman then she is mortal
xanthippi is a woman therefore xanthippi
is mortal another valid rule of
inference is called denying the
consequent the law of contraposition or
modus tollens which goes
if p then q
not q therefore
not p
and just my reflection on that this is
the logical rule explaining refutation
so especially in science when your
theory p predicts that q will happen
and then in the experiment q doesn't
happen you have a problem in the case
where you had some other theory call it
t
that did predict q wouldn't happen then
you've shown
p is false logically of course logically
it could always be the case that your
assumption was false and in fact the
experiment was flawed but that's not
actually a problem for science science
works anyway and people who do
experiments generally are very careful
about trying to detect correct and
eliminate lots of errors from their
experimental procedure okay so we've got
a couple of rules of inference to begin
with everyone begins with modus ponens
and modus tollens as pinka indeed has
done and if you look up rules of
inference on wikipedia you can find
long lists of them i'm going to skip
forward to where pinker starts talking
about some more interesting ones and
i'll pick it up where he says quote more
interesting still is the principle of
explosion also known as from
contradiction anything follows
p
not p therefore q
suppose you believe p
hexable is in england suppose you also
believe not p hextable is not in england
by disjunctive edition you can go from p
to p or q hexable is in england or
unicorns exist then by the disjunctive
syllogism you can go from p or q and not
p to q okay so just pausing there so so
this disjunctive addition all this is
saying this rule this curious rule which
says well if you kind of know something
is true if you know that p is true
then it has to be the case that p or q
is true necessarily you already know
that p is q therefore the disjunction so
it's called p or q also has to be true
so let's keep going with uh pinker's
little proof here then by the
disjunctive syllogism you can go from p
or q
and
not p to q hexable is not in england
therefore unicorns exist congratulations
you just logically proved that unicorns
exist people often misquote ralph waldo
emerson as saying consistency is the
hobgoblin of little minds in fact he
wrote about a foolish consistency which
he advised great souls to transcend but
either way the put down is dubious if
your belief system contains a
contradiction you can believe anything
morgan besser once said of a philosopher
he didn't care for there's a guy who
asserted both p and not p and then drew
out all the consequences okay just um
pausing there just my reflection on this
so let's just focus on that claim by
pinker where he said if your belief
system contains a contradiction you can
believe anything
okay
so
there is the innocent way in which this
is
quite reasonable okay if you can
identify a contradiction
then yes you can go on and believe any
old nonsense that you like you shouldn't
gloss over contradictions in a so-called
belief system and thinking they are of
no consequence they are however we are
going to encounter contradictions
throughout our belief systems throughout
what we regard as being good
explanations routinely and in your
personal life you may have these but as
i've already been at pains to say in
physics we have these two grand theories
of fundamental reality quantum physics
and general relativity which are at odds
which make contradictory statements but
does that mean we can believe anything
does that mean that just because we have
this
system of science which contains
contradictions when considered as a
whole
that this is a
reason for believing anything no well
there's a few reasons for saying no to
that number one we shouldn't be
believing our scientific theories in the
first place so that's one thing they're
not really a belief system but even
taking them as just our best
explanations of the world i wonder what
pinker would say about should our best
explanations of the world be able to
contain contradictions and if they do
does that permit us to create any old
explanation we like does that allow us
to then go on to say therefore unicorns
exist if quantum theory is saying the
fundamental nature of reality is
discrete and if general relativity is
saying the fundamental nature of reality
is continuous
and these fundamentally contradict one
another does that then allow us to go on
and say well because we endorse a
contradiction therefore unicorns exist
no it doesn't what we have to say in
that situation is that they're making
incompatible claims and we don't know
which one really holds as a ultimately
true description or explanation of
reality all we say is that they are our
best explanations neither of which we
should truly believe and as david
deutsch says it would be better if we
considered the human mind as something
like a thing which has problems a thing
which has a problem situation and
therefore we can go out into the world
and find solutions for individual
problem situations sometimes those
solutions will contradict one another
but that does not mean we can therefore
conclude on the basis of the fact that
we are entities which contain
contradictions and entities that can
that can live with contradictions that
therefore anything goes this is a
limitation of logic when applied to the
rationality of the human mind something
i'm not sure
that pinker really grapples with the
pinker really grapples with the notion
that
we all of us contain within us
contradictions and that's fine it'll
always be the case because we cannot
have an unproblematic perfectly
consistent state nor is that desirable
let's keep going i'm skipping over a
little bit more of what pinker has said
and i'll go to where he says quote a
valid argument correctly applies rules
of inference to the premises it only
tells us that if the premises are true
then the conclusion must be true it
makes no commitment as to whether the
premises are true and thus says nothing
about the truth of the conclusion
this may be contrasted with a sound
argument one that applies the rules
correctly to true premises and thus
yields a true conclusion
and
just pausing there in the porpyrian
worldview we could still have so-called
sound arguments but what we would say is
that we don't know that the premises are
true but on the assumption that they are
then yes we would have a sound argument
given that those premises represent
something like our
best explanation or a uh something like
our best understanding of the world that
for all practical purposes in order to
solve this problem we're just going to
regard these premises as conditionally
or provisionally true conjecturally true
something like that and so therefore the
rules of logic should lead to true
conclusions it's either we endorse
something like that or we just say
there's no possibility of having a sound
argument but all we have are valid or
invalid arguments which might be fine as
well now i'm skipping a bit where pinker
again goes down an avenue of talking
about clinton versus trump in 2016 and
2017 and uh using the existence of their
vice respective vice presidential
candidates as an example for a kind of
valid argument and i'll just pick it up
where he says quote presenting a valid
argument as if it were sound is a common
fallacy a politician promises if we
eliminate waste and fraud from the
bureaucracy we can lower taxes increase
benefits and balance the budget i will
eliminate waste and fraud therefore vote
for me and everything will be better
fortunately people can often spot a lack
of soundness and if we have a family of
retorts to the sophist who draws
plausible conclusions from dubious
premises that's a big if is what you say
if wishes were horses beggars would ride
assume a spherical cow among scientists
from a joke about a physicist recruited
by a farmer to increase milk production
yes so my reflection on this is yes
people
readily spot a lack of soundness okay
especially with that claim there that's
a big if okay and skipping a little bit
more and pinker ends this section
by explaining quote
logicians have developed more powerful
logics that break the p's and q's of
propositional calculus into finer pieces
these include predicate calculus which
distinguishes subjects from predicates
and all from some modal logic which
distinguishes statements that happen to
be true in this world like
paris is the capital of france from
those that are necessarily true in all
worlds like two plus two equals four
temporal logic which distinguishes past
present and future and deontic logic
which worries about permission
obligation and duty okay and the next
section is called
formal reconstruction which is about
how we could take an argument in theory
which is presented in english and
decompose it into its logical sequence
to figure out whether or not it's valid
or sound or whatever i don't find this
of much use because i don't think things
ever really occur this way i would
imagine it's almost never been the case
that in a court of law for example the
argument has ever broken down into the
basic symbols of logic and then proved i
find this exercise rather pointless now
the pinker goes on to spend a long time
analyzing a particular argument given by
the democrats presidential candidate
andrew yang
and he
reconstructs this in formal logic to
some extent along the way describing
yang as being admirably explicit with
his platform and so i i yeah i don't
find this particularly informative with
regards to understanding logic in any
greater detail so we're going to skip
over that section and pick it up in the
section about which is titled critical
thinking and informal fallacies which is
all about those informal fallacies in
formal fallacies being things like ad
hominem the straw man argument any of
the informal fallacies that again listed
in wikipedia if you look them up it's
not like affirming the consequent so you
know an argument like if p then q
q therefore p
this is a
formal fallacy it's invalid you know an
example of that is
if it has rained then the road is wet
the road is wet and therefore it has
rained well that's a formally invalid
argument it's false because the road
might be wet for other reasons beyond
the rain someone might have hosed it
down for example now i will read a
little bit of this section but i'll
ignore most of it because it's it's
extremely long and it provides content i
think you can get lots of places now
people collect these informal fallacies
and as pinker admits in this very
chapter it's basically what an educator
running a course on critical thinking
bases their entire curriculum on my
personal favorite of these is called
begging the question which is circular
argument or assuming what you're trying
to prove i've got an article on my
website about it called begging the big
ones where i conclude that any
explanation purporting to be
ultimate in some sense the ultimate
explanation for the universe whether
it's god or whether it's laws of physics
or whatever must beg the question in
other words somehow somewhere within the
explanation for ultimate reality it
assumes what it said it was going to
prove or demonstrate in the first place
so
my nomination for most interesting of
these informal fallacies is begging the
question what pinker says in this
section about this is well let me read
quote he says though formal fallacies
such as denying the antecedent may be
exposed when an argument is formally
reconstructed the more common errors in
reasoning can't be pigeonholed in this
way
rather than crisply violating an
argument form in the propositional
calculus arguers exploit some
psychologically compelling but
intellectually spurious lure they are
called informal fallacies and fans of
rationality have given them names
collected them by the dozens and
arranged them together with the formal
fallacies into web pages posters flash
cards and these syllabuses of freshman
courses on critical thinking end quote
yes exactly educators as he says there
are enamored by teaching these things as
if it really helps people to become
better critical thinkers i think that
all they are are labels for errors okay
there's a specific kind of error and
learning about these errors it can be
good but it doesn't make you especially
immune to making them yourself or making
other errors as well they're all just
kinds of errors an error is the natural
state of things so trying to detect and
then correct the errors that's really
what critical thinking is about it's
about criticizing
what is wrong in some reasoning in some
premises or anywhere else a knowledge
claim happens to be made so i'm skipping
most of the this section and just at the
end of the section pinker says quote so
with all these formal and informal
fallacies waiting to entrap us wikipedia
lists more than a hundred
why can't we do away with this jibber
jabber once and for all and implement
leibniz's plan for logical discourse why
can't we make our reasonings as tangible
as those of the mathematicians so that
we can find our errors at a glance why
in the 21st century do we still have bar
room arguments twitter wars couples
counselling presidential debates why
don't we say
let us calculate and see who is right we
are not living in leibniz as utopia and
as with other utopias we never will
there are at least three reasons end
quote okay so on to the next section so
here are the reasons according to pinker
that we can't just calculate our way to
the truth okay and the next section is
titled logical versus empirical truths
and he says quote one reason logic will
never rule the world is the fundamental
distinction between logical propositions
and empirical ones
which hume called relations of ideas and
matters of fact and philosophers call
analytic and synthetic to determine
whether all bachelors are unmarried is
true you just need to know what the
words mean replacing bachelor with the
phrase male and adult and not married
and check the truth table but to
determine whether all swans are white is
true you have to get out of your
armchair and look if you visit new
zealand you will discover the
proposition is false because the swans
there are black end quote so i've
mentioned on this podcast before that
this
analytic synthetic distinction which i
think is due to can't is not as neat as
what people would presume in the first
place okay it's not just a matter of
either things are defined as being true
or
things are empirically true by going out
into the world and finding out whether
or not they're true contingently true
rather than being necessarily true and
one reason for this comes down to this
up priori versus a posteriori division
that can be made as well which is a
priori is before the fact before knowing
anything else about the world by
definition and after the fact going out
into the world and investigating
analytic and a priori seem to mean
basically the same thing except you can
have
synthetic up priori claims and my
favorite one of those is how long the
meter is
so by definition a priority a meter is
one meter long but to know how long a
particular meter is you need to go out
into the world and investigate it by
finding the distance between scratches
etched on a bar of metal in paris or
these days of course using lasers and
measure the speed of light and then see
how far the light goes in a certain
amount of time and that's how long your
meter is so a meter is a curious kind of
a thing which fits both synthetic and
analytic or a posteriori and a priori
it's curious so next pinker goes on to
explain how obviously observation of the
world is often needed i'll skip this
because it's a bit trivial to know how
many teeth a horse has you've got to
look into the mouth of a horse
we're not learning anything new here so
all pinker is saying here is we cannot
calculate our way in the way that
leibniz thinks to truth because there
are empirical truths there are things we
can only know by observing the world and
in the preparing framework of course we
say we have to observe in order to rule
out a bunch of guesses we might have so
we have a whole bunch of conjectures we
make about the world observation serves
the purpose of refuting all of them but
the one ideally but the one that we rely
on in order to solve our problems okay
so
what's another reason that pinker
provides for leibniz's dream of
calculating our way to the truth not
being reasonable but what he says in the
next section which is titled formal
versus ecological rationality he says
quote a second reason leibniz's dream
will never come true lies in the nature
of formal logic it is formal blinkered
from seeing anything but the symbols and
their arrangement as they are laid out
in front of the reasoner it is blind to
the content of the proposition what
those symbols mean and the context and
background knowledge that might be mixed
into the deliberation okay so that's
quite right um pinky goes on for a few
pages to expound upon this notion i
still think it basically comes down to
the fact that
logic is about the
manipulation of symbols which are
necessarily true and yet
what we have when we talk science
history anywhere else outside of logic
and mathematics are not necessarily true
statements they're contingently true
okay they are things that we regard as
part of our best explanation so as david
describes it approximately true at best
they're approximately true and so
saying that a system for arriving at
necessary truth given necessarily true
premises uh on the assumption they're
necessarily true isn't really easily
neatly portable into the realm of
approximately true conjectures about the
nature of physical reality okay so
that's these are two distinct areas one
can help to inform the other but just
copy pasting one onto the other isn't a
recipe for producing necessary truth
which is what leibniz was after pinker
ends the section by concluding quote
they still fall short of life in all its
plenitude that leibniz is logical utopia
which requires self-inflicted amnesia
for background knowledge not only runs
against the grain of human cognition but
is ill-suited for a world in which not
every relevant fact can be laid out as a
premise end quote quite right exactly
perfect in that section pink has
basically just said that logic is
divorced from the meaning of the
meanings of the claims it represents
hence it's limited which i couldn't
agree more with and next he goes on to a
section which he titles classical versus
family resemblance categories this is
about wittgenstein and so well let me
just read a little quote he says a third
reason that rationality will never be
reduced to logic is the concepts that
people care about differ in a crucial
way from the predicates of classical
logic take the predicate even number
which can be defined by the
biconditional if an integer can be
divided by two without remainder it is
even and vice versa the biconditional is
true as is the proposition eight can be
divided by two without remainder and
from these premises we can deduce the
true conclusion eight is even likewise
with if a person is female and the
mother of a parent she is a grandmother
and vice versa and if a person is male
and adult and not married he is a
bachelor and vice versa we might suppose
that with enough effort every human
concept can be defined in this way by
laying out necessary conditions for it
to be true the first if then in the
biconditional and sufficient conditions
for it to be true the vice versa
converse the revery was famously
punctuated by the philosopher ludwig
wittgenstein
1889-1951
just try he said to find the necessary
and sufficient conditions for any of our
everyday concepts what is the common
denominator across all the past times we
call games physical activity not with
board games gaiety not in chess
competitors not solid here winning and
losing not ring around the rosie or a
child throwing a ball
end quote so this is um this is often
made people often make a big deal about
this wittgenstein thing and this this
family resemblance thing that you know
there's not a simple way of defining
what a game is because there's lots of
different things that fit under that
umbrella term game and they don't seem
to have one single thing in common uh
i've always shrugged my shoulders at
this it's like oh well big deal we still
know i think in the papirian worldview
or what david deutch might say is just
to argue well there's no perfectly
unambiguous language it's just a special
case of no theory is final language is
for communicating with one another and
so it's going to be error prone both in
its transmission and reception even if
there was a perfect definition the
sender and receiver has to interpret it
different people may interpret the same
thing differently so again it's only an
issue for people like wittgenstein or
leibniz and others if they think that
the whole purpose of knowledge is about
proving something as true if you give up
that if you give up this whole thing
that knowledge is about justifying as
true
your claims and instead you embrace
conjectural knowledge it's just not an
issue this idea of what a game is well
you can just conjecture and then debate
and refute what you think a game happens
to be no big deal pinker goes on to say
quote
it's not that all concepts are fuzzy
family resemblance categories people are
perfectly capable of putting things in
little boxes everyone understands that a
number is either even or odd with no
in-betweens
okay i'm just going to take exception
with that i wouldn't be so fast with it
okay that seems to me what pink has done
right there in saying everyone
understands that and now a number can be
even or odd with no in-betweens
is itself a logical fallacy this whole
idea of everyone understands what
everyone says that something like that
everyone understands or no one would
disagree something like that that's a
hasty generalization i have actually
taught young people exactly that concept
for the first time more than once and
young people
upon learning about the difference
between even and odd numbers will
automatically ask you about zero or
negative numbers
even then this sharpness or
non-fuzziness of what an even number or
what an odd number is doesn't mean it's
immediately obvious okay they're not the
same thing being non-fuzzy is not
obvious
the proof of fermat's last theorem by
andrew wiles is 100 pages long or
something
and this doesn't mean it's clear or
obvious even if it's not fuzzy and even
for simple cases like even versus odd
that takes quite a lot of background
knowledge about what numbers are what
integers are how division works what
remainders are and so on and so forth
again consider someone who's never
learned any of this before so i think
professor pinker needs to be a little
bit more careful with claims like that
the claim that everyone understands the
number is either even or odd well
only if you're excluding that vast
number of people who've never learned
what even an odd are okay so and and
when you do it's not that trivial you
know it's not like you it becomes
immediately obvious to you okay upon
first learning this most people will
have forgotten what it was like to learn
something like that okay again i'm i'm
skipping much of the
this section this part of this chapter
uh pink goes through when he received an
email from the democratic party which
was about apparently the republicans
classifying pizza as a vegetable or as a
vegetable or something like that for the
purpose of school lunches what i was
just thinking is is it common in the
united states to get emails from
political parties uh what is the reason
for saying that i received the following
email from the democratic party in a
book like this is it a virtue signal to
an in-group or something like that i
don't know
whatever the case on to the next section
which is titled logical computation
versus pattern association he asks if
many of our judgments are too squishy to
be captured in logic how do we think at
all and he goes on to answer a little
later one answer may be found in the
family of cognitive models called
pattern associations perceptrons
connectionist nets parallel distributed
processing models artificial neural
networks and deep learning systems the
key idea is that rather than
manipulating strings of symbols with
rules an intelligent system can
aggregate tens thousands or millions of
graded signals each capturing the degree
to which a property is present end quote
so my issue here is that for pinker it
seems to be the case that the answer to
how learning happens or thinking happens
in human beings intelligence systems
like ourselves is to be found in the
operation of existing computer systems
like neural nets that are just called
intelligent systems so he thinks the
that what we call artificial
intelligence or neural nets or whatever
that they are actually good models for
what is truly going on with the software
of the human mind it's a little curious
because well he's going to go on to say
that in the case of neural nets in
particular that no one knows how they
reach their conclusions
so what's being claimed here is that an
unexplained thing namely how a neural
net reaches its conclusions is an
explanation for
how the human mind is working so an
unexplained thing the neural net
explains another unexplained thing the
human mind and in fact there is no
explanation here it's just that they're
both unexplained therefore one explains
the other well if that's if that logical
fallacy doesn't have a name it should
have one
and he reaches this conclusion by the
way
by
an example of how the word vegetable
most of us know what a vegetable is and
it's very difficult to train a neural
network to come up with whatever
vegetable is to come up with the rules
for what a vegetable is let me just read
a small part about
pinker's explanation of how neural nets
work and how they apply weights
to different claims
and well he says quote who you may ask
programmed in the all-important
connection weights the answer is no one
they are learned from experience the
network is trained by presenting it with
many examples of different foods
together with the correct category
provided by a teacher end quote for me
what's useful to note here given the
explanation that pink is providing
is that
no knowledge is actually being created
by the neural net so the example being
used here is how you might train a
neural net to figure out what a
vegetable is with no one explicitly
giving it an algorithm for what a
vegetable is but they are training it so
it's not that the neural net itself is
creating knowledge that is not what's
going on it's the programmer or the
trainer who already knows what a
vegetable is so they're programming it
by proxy we might say the network is
trained but it's not learning it's not
creating knowledge that did not
originate in the mind of the human using
the system or training the system and so
this is a stark difference between what
a human being is doing in conjecturing
explanations conjecturing knowledge and
what something like a neural net a dumb
computer is doing no matter how
sophisticated this system happens to be
it's not conjecturing explanations it's
not conjecturing knowledge it's relying
upon the knowledge that is already in
the minds of actually intelligent human
beings in order to arrive at the
conclusions that it does he goes on to
say quote the challenge in getting these
networks to work is how to train them
the problem is with the connections from
the input layer to the hidden layer
since the units are hidden from the
environment their guesses cannot be
matched against correct values supplied
by the teacher end quote so for me this
seems to suggest this cannot explain how
to produce knowledge no one yet knows
which is what people are doing routinely
outside of let's say a classroom just to
find what is the best way for you to get
to work is something no one knows until
you yourself create that knowledge there
is no one to ask and so this is not the
kind of thing although we do it
routinely that any neural net is
actually doing the neural net is
learning stuff that people already know
okay because they're the thing that is
training it okay there's already
knowledge out there in the world and
that is being used by proxy to inform
the operation of the neural net he goes
on to say quote these networks are
powering the great ai awakening we are
living through which is giving us the
first serviceable products for speech
and image recognition
question answering translation and other
human-like feats okay end quote he says
they're human-like again the standard
for that is creating human knowledge not
imitating sounds or what not
jaron lenier has made some excellent
incisive remarks about this this whole
idea of translation is apparently
appearing like if you go to google
translate it will translate
from whatever language you like into
english or from any language into any
other language and it looks as if the
computer is kind of doing something
intelligent but it's not it's disguising
the fact that it is relying upon
gathering up actual translations that
have been done by real creative humans
elsewhere at some other time and all the
computer is doing is aggregating that
knowledge that already exists it's not
creating any new knowledge it's just
summarizing what's already there and so
it's not human-like it's not a
human-like feat at all the human-like
feat that was done was by actual humans
elsewhere in creating the knowledge of
translation okay and juron lenier makes
a a huge deal about this because he says
that these translators that are doing
the work of actual translation between
french and spanish or mandarin and
cantonese or cantonese and english
whatever that all of those translations
are gathered up by google and then being
used to supposedly automate the process
of translation but of course any real
translator will tell you it's always
very very crude and these translators
that have done the real work are really
paid for the work they're done by google
it's just the skype google is disguising
the fact these tr automatic translators
are disguising the fact that behind the
computation that they put out the the
translation they do for you is actually
a an army of real-life human translators
that have already done all the work
before so it's not human-like i would i
would reject that he goes on to say
quote
deep learning networks often outperform
good old-fashioned artificial
intelligence which executes logic-like
deductions on hand-coded propositions
and rules the contrast in the way they
work is stark unlike logical inference
the inner workings of a neural net are
inscrutable end quote i just think all
that's not true it confuses
understanding with predicting or giving
a step-by-step recipe for how all of it
happened so that the fact they call it
deep learning doesn't really mean deep
learning's going on the fact they call
it artificial intelligence doesn't mean
it's actual intelligence the fact they
call it a neural net doesn't mean it's
like neurons
these are marketing terms in computation
by programmers who have yes
sophisticated interesting systems these
are well worthwhile advances but don't
be misled by the terms that they're
using by this terminology which
disguising what's really going on it is
still the hardware of logic gates going
on that's what's happening it's not
conjecture and refutation it's not
genuine human level creativity and when
he says there that the operations of a
neural net are inscrutable that that
disguises something okay it's like
saying that how water was able to boil
in some pot is inscrutable and the
reason
because no one can outline what each and
every molecule of h2o in the pot
actually did now it's true to say that
when water boils it is impossible for
anyone to give an account
of every single particle of every single
molecule of h2o in that pot of water
that is intractable it's too difficult
it's too complicated and so therefore we
have these higher level emergent
explanations what we say is we
understand what must have happened even
if okay what must have happened to each
of those water molecules is eventually
they get they gain
effectively escape velocity they go from
being in the water phase to being in the
gaseous phase we understand we have an
explanation of what's going on
and in the same way these neural
networks
might be inscrutable in the way that we
can't explain what every single little
step is that lead to the ultimate
outcome the ultimate output of this
particular system but we can still say
how the system is doing what it's doing
by weighting particular connections
that's what's going on there's a
difference between intractable okay
not being able to follow every single
fine-grained detail
and
nonetheless comprehendable
understandable something for which we
have a good emergent explanation like
pinker says in the very next sentence
most of the millions of hidden units
don't stand for any coherent concept
that we can make sense of and the
computer scientists who train them can't
explain how they arrive at any
particular answer end quote that might
be right but again that's like a
physicist saying well they can't account
for why any one particular h2o molecule
turns into gas while another didn't at
the boiling point why it is that some
have
the right velocity to escape the rest of
the liquid and others remain in the
liquid phase
it's unimportant those details are
unimportant for understanding the
overall process of boiling or
vaporization okay we understand this in
terms of the science
so too for something like
this of the operation of a neural net
but to be fair pinker then goes on to
equivocate on this he says quote is the
human brain a big deep learning network
certainly not for many reasons but the
similarities are illuminating the brain
has around 100 billion neurons connected
by a hundred trillion synapses and by
the time we are 18 we have been
absorbing examples from our environments
for more than 300 million waking seconds
so we are prepared to do a lot of
pattern matching and associating just
like these networks the networks are
tailor-made for the fuzzy family
resemblance categories that make up so
much of our conceptual repertoire neural
networks thus provide clues about the
portion of human cognition that is
rational but not technically speaking
logical they demystify the inarticulate
yet sometimes uncanny mental power we
call intuition instinct inklings gut
feelings and the sixth sense end quote
so yes there's all that
which i'd call guessing and in some
cases guessing given some explicit
knowledge but the main point is again
those systems those other systems can't
create knowledge and so that's why the
human brain is different to these other
systems these other systems
whether you call them artificial
intelligence neural networks deep
learning networks whatever they're not
generating new explanations they're not
conjecturing knowledge and finally we're
near the end i'm skipping
evermore of the this last section here
and i'll just pick it up towards the end
where pinker says quote
human rationality is a hybrid system the
brain contains pattern associations that
soak up family resemblances and
aggregate large numbers of statistical
clues but it also contains a logical
symbol manipulator that can assemble
concepts into propositions and draw out
their implications call it system 2 or
recursive cognition or rule-based
reasoning formal logic is a tool that
can purify and extend this mode of
thinking freeing it from the bugs that
come with being a social and emotional
animal because our propositional
reasoning frees us from similarity in
stereotypes it enables the highest
achievements of human rationality such
as science morality and law though
porpoises fit into the family
resemblance among fishers the rules that
define membership in linnaean classes
like if an animal cycles its young then
it is a mammal tell us they are not in
fact members
through chains of categorical reasoning
like this we can be convinced that
humans are apes the sun is a star and
solid objects are mostly empty space in
the social sphere our pattern finders
easily see the ways in which people
differ some individuals are richer
smarter stronger swifter better looking
and more like us than others
but when we embrace the proposition that
all humans are created equal if x is a
human then x has rights we can sequester
these impressions from our legal and
moral decision making and treat all
people equally
and quote end of the chapter here of
rationality logic and critical thinking
and i might just say at the end that i
might amend what pinker has said there
when we embrace the proposition that all
humans are created equal when we embrace
the proposition that all humans are
universal explainers then we understand
the fundamental thing that unites all
human minds this creative capacity that
enables them to have a deep connection
with the rest of reality because we are
able to form a model a representation of
any other part of physical reality
uniquely we are the ones able to do this
in the universe so far as we know now
the systems none of these fancy computer
systems that we've been able to devise
can do that we can do it and all people
that exist throughout the universe if
there is indeed alien life out there or
if there is some future artificial
general intelligence that we give birth
to we'll be able to do this as well
explain the universe in which it finds
itself and that is the sense in which we
are all equal and the way this
explanation generating happens error
detection and correction of
our conjectures about reality none of
which are ultimately true and which
therefore cannot be arrived at purely by
formal logic which is what i would say
is in some sense missing from this
chapter about logic and critical
thinking okay it should have focused
somewhat more on this idea of error
detection and correction really that's
what critical thinking should be
regarded as being able to find
criticisms of okay being critical of
our claims about reality that's what
critical thinking is about and the
reason that you apply criticism at all
in the first place is to try and
identify where the errors are and once
you've identified where the errors are
then you can correct the errors improve
make progress come up with yet
better explanations more universal
explanations explanations which can have
a broader repertoire of solutions to a
larger number of problems which are
revealed by deeper explanations okay
that is this is the grand optimistic
populion deutsche world view okay
nevertheless we have in this chapter a
good summary as i say of the academic
university style take on what logic and
critical thinking is until next time
bye-bye
[Music]
[Applause]
uh
[Music]